---
layout: post
title:  Ann Arbor City Council Wrapup for Monday, 2023-04-17
date:   2023-04-19 08:07:00 -0400
meeting_date: 2023-04-17 19:00:00 -0400
image:
  path: /assets/2023-04-17/fuller-park.jpg
  alt: An aerial photograph of the current Fuller Park pool, waterslide, and just a little bit of a soccer field showing.
  caption: The current Fuller Park pool. Fuller Park will be renovated as Bicentennial Park.
  credit: "From <a href=\"http://a2gov.legistar.com/View.ashx?M=F&ID=11901365&GUID=43A752DA-73A1-4C18-9981-BD79147DC615\">the City Administrators Budget Proposal</a>."
categories: a2council preview
tags: 415-w-washington comprehensive-plan density segregation housing budget defund-the-police unarmed-response chimney-swifts treeline-trail airport hangar fbo gelman-plume water-rates water council-rules
map_415_w_washington:
  - lat: 42.28022290463792
    lon: -83.75243271637474
    text: "415 W Washington"
  - lat: 42.28038319057523
    lon: -83.75119209919065
    text: "The Blind Pig"
  - lat: 42.279601978540384
    lon: -83.75328108753985
    text: "St Paul Lutheran Church"
  - lat: 42.27853357121308
    lon: -83.75150188938429
    text: "Liberty Lofts"
  - lat: 42.27972861988274
    lon: -83.7520637875398
    text: "The Mark"
  - lat: 42.28114240339128
    lon: -83.75292927397211
    text: "YMCA"
---
<span class="h-event">The <span class="p-name">Ann Arbor City Council met</span> on <time class="dt-start" datetime="2023-04-17T19:00-0400">Monday, April 17, 2023</time>.</span>

We finally got to see the city administrator's [budget presentation]().  I'll walk you through it & give my thoughts.  The contract for the comprehensive land use plan update was approved, with strong language about redressing segregation in our new plan, and also with the assumption that we will be creating density.  Also, the 415 W Washington rezoning and concept plan were approved.


<!--more-->

## Meeting Details

{% include infobox-wrapup.html 
  date    = page.meeting_date
  agenda  = "http://a2gov.legistar.com/MeetingDetail.aspx?ID=1062171&GUID=CA414ADD-66B8-48BE-9373-6DCAFA7EECC3&Options=info|&Search="
  youtube = "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oaYHCuOpXPg"
  thread  = "https://a2mi.social/@MegaMichelle/110216635786456938"
  votes   = "https://a2council.vote/post/council-meeting-2023-04-17/"
%}

## Jude Walton

Jude Walton was a community activist who was [recently murdered](https://www.mlive.com/news/ann-arbor/2023/04/jude-walton-slain-ann-arbor-community-leader-remembered-for-welcoming-spirit.html).  She was a founding member of the [Independent Community Police Oversight Commission](https://www.a2gov.org/departments/city-clerk/Boards-and-Commissions/Pages/Independent-Community-Police-Oversight-Commission.aspx).  She worked for [Avalon Housing](https://avalonhousing.org/), a nonprofit which provides supportive services and subsidized housing to low-income people.  Many city council members mourned her loss, at the city council meeting.

Several councilmembers also thanked the police for [arresting a suspect](https://www.mlive.com/news/ann-arbor/2023/04/man-54-charged-with-murder-in-strangulation-death-of-ann-arbor-woman.html).  I hope we don't take from this the lesson that the police have done their job and now the community is safe, and we must continue to pour all of the city's money into maintaining a large police force in order to keep us safe.

For one thing, the police did not keep Jude Walton safe.  This suspect is someone who has been sent to jail many times by the police, and that wasn't enough to keep Jude Walton safe.  To me, this seems like evidence that our system of police and jails is not sufficient at promoting safety, and it would be fruitless to add more of these things.

Instead, I believe that instead of continuing to pour money into this system that does not work, we should invest more in the type of programs that Jude Walton worked for - subsidized housing with supportive services.  Services that can provide treatment for mental health issues, help with substance use disorders, keep people safe, and help them be a part of the community.  Instead of police and jails, we could be [investing on more holistic solutions to public safety](https://www.brookings.edu/research/want-to-reduce-violence-invest-in-place/).

<a class="youtube" href="https://youtu.be/oaYHCuOpXPg?t=6709">Councilmember Cynthia Harrison (Ward 1) said it best</a>:

> This is a traumatic time for our entire community.  Fears could be potentially heightened at the moment and there will be temptation among some to hold up Jude Walton's death as a call to arms for communities to pull back on initiatives such as affordable housing that work to break the cycle of homelessness and poverty.  We have so many stories and data about the positive impacts of having a home on the lives of children and adults. We aren't going to let what occurred - as horriffic as it was - derail the decades of work that she engaged in and those that she advocated for.  What we must remember is that this is the act of one individual - a terrible, horriffic, and unimaginable act.  We must not use this individual act to foster hate against multiple groups:  People of color, the unhoused, returning citizens, people with a mental illness, and those who suffer from a substance use disorder.  The best way for all of us to honor Jude, who was a pillar of our community, is to lift up the cause of affordable housing, which she spent 14 years fighting for.  We can honor her legacy and uplift her spirit by supporting the work that she did and by supporting initiatives that provide housing, which everyone deserves.

## Proclamations

There were two proclamations of observance periods made at this meeting:

* [April is Arab American Heritage Month](http://a2gov.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=6122669&GUID=A60D50F9-6DE1-46B3-8487-D4AF094853E2&Options=&Search=)
* [April 28 is Workers Memorial Day](http://a2gov.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=6172767&GUID=4ECD1DA9-B4CD-4AC2-9408-BB4A7618CB23&Options=&Search=), [to honor those who were injured on the job](https://aflcio.org/about-us/conferences-and-events/workers-memorial-day) and redouble our efforts to promote workplace safety, through things like unions.

## Presentation of the City Administrator's [Proposed Budget](http://a2gov.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=6122664&GUID=6B3491D0-5C3A-45CC-90E4-3FFE304AA06B&Options=&Search=)

The city administrator has prepared a proposed budget for the city for FY 2024-2025.  This is important because 

State revenue sharing is not going up, so we're on our own.

Our pension fund is 90% funded - better than most!  That means we don't have a big burden to pay off the debt.

Bicentennial celebration:  $200k for 2024, $200k for 2025.

Fuller Park -> Bicentennial Park.  Splash pad, geothermal, sculpture to former Olympians??, sensory trails.
Sculpture to pay tribute to indigenous land holders.  Y'know what'd really pay tribute to them?  Pay tribute to them!  Give the land back (to Saginaw Chippewa), hope they'll let us rent it back for a park, but maybe they won't cuz it's their land.

A new building for the city to buy or build:  Election Center + CTN + Emergency Operations Center. 7-fig land transaction. $300k annual expense.  9 days early voting. EOC would run during storms, vice president visits, etc.  Violent fascist uprisings???

Unarmed response: $3.5M from ARPA.  $250k from marijuana $$$ in each of FY23, 24, 25.  What is the status of this program???  Ask CROS maybe?  Ask CM Song? (She made sure it was ARPA-funded) or CM Harrison (interested in this issue)

121 E Catherine St, 63 apts, first flr 2300 sqft center for African American cultural & entrepreneurial pursuits. $150k to build the community org.

They're gonna do a study, $150k, about compensation, to make us competitive and equitable. We need good staff.  We need to hire & retain them.

"Supportive Connections" moved from 4th flr courthouse to 1st flr city hall.  Using opioid settlement $ to remodel.  Toynbee Idea: Safe consumption center.

Public restrooms:  "Throne" https://www.thronelabs.co/.  $200k from arpa.  DDA involved. AAATA involved so drivers have a place to pee. 

Downtown safety:  They want walking teams downtown with fire-EMS, and "supportive connections".  Great idea except the police.  Ppl won't talk when they're around and won't get their needs met.  Cops will take notes on ppl & use it to oppress their community.

Redevelop city hall, with market-rate development?  Use less office space cuz WFH.  Market-rate development at the Kline lot?????  What did AAHC say?  Too big for all-subsidized housing.  Maybe split the land up like Veridian or 5th/William Y lot??

$1M marijuana tax unallocated.  What to do with it???
Do yr duty by smoking more marijuana.  Marijuana tax revenue did not increase.

I'm not hearing enough about defunding the police!

## Comprehensive Plan Update

CA-14: Comprehensive Plan update.  Explicitly about more housing, and redressing segregation:
From the RFP: The City has contributed to racial and related segregation through decisions and investments over time. This work will acknowledge and accept this, and focus on reparative measures and policies that will seek to not only minimize such outcomes in the future, but undo damages of the past.

I hope public engagement will be representative & include ppl who live here as well as ppl who don't, but would want to.

## 415 W Washington [Zoning and Concept Plan](http://a2gov.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=6054963&GUID=41B151CE-10DE-4380-811B-79A5ADFADB3E&Options=&Search=)

B-1: 415 W Washington. "Pre-entitlement" - city clears the way for a private developer to do this.  We'll get $ for subsidized housing. We couldn't build subsidized here because of flood plain / flood way.  5 stories, 157 units, historic preservation, chimney swifts, soil remediation, treeline trail.

## Center of the City

Center of the City: Lots of speakers say it's time to put this mess out of its misery, after the staff memo about the feasibility of doing food trucks there.

## Gelman Litigation

CA-12: $150k for Gelman litigation:  Thresholds have been crossed where the court order says they need to build new monitoring wells & do stuff, but they didn't do it, so we need to launch an additional lawsuit.

CA-11: Earhart sidewalk.  This one is a no brainer, but people have been complaining about another sidewalk on Earhart.  City has a compromise that will narrow the road, put the sidewalk there, & remove fewer trees.

Water rate increases, to support water capital improvements. Some of that treatment plant is from the 1930s.
